# The End of the Fall

The end of the Fall semester has a unique place in the cycle of the academic year in the small liberal arts college. The intersection of various features to the academic landscape has created a profound effect on how each of the various members of the college campus life interact with each other and contribute to a shared experience of the academic year. These won't be the last notes on this particular time, but it's a start to try to establish what are the moods that hold sway as we come to the end of the calendar year and pass through into our respective winter breaks.

## A Question of Calendars

Academic years, like calendar years, run on a regular cycle which draws upon features of the natural and the everyday human life to offer its distinct character and populate its hard-to-pin-down structures. The temperature drifts down until it suddenly drops, the rain and snow falls as the rivers subside and the sun peaks a lower arch across the sky. The results in our individual and collective behaviors range from the subtle to the obvious, holiday celebrations of food and fellowship impossible and pointless to ignore.

The academic year has been mapped onto this natural cycle, but at an odd angle. The academic year starts just ahead of the transition into Fall, ramping up our scholarly work just as the year is slowing and winding down. Fall finals, one of the highest moments of activity in the academic calendar, lines up a few weeks ahead of nature's nadir. Spring semester tracks the turn of the year, beginning just as the day is at its shortest and tilting toward newal and vibrancy as Spring Break and graduation arrive. Calling off classes in the dead of winter and the height of Summer makes perfect sense — whether we'd hunker at home or go out into the sunny world, we'd rather be doning something else instead of studying.

Back at finals week, we're reaching a moment of great activity, where final projects are rapidly being constructed and final exams charge headlong into flocks of anxious students. Where before the course calendar seemed to stretch on endlessly, now as we being the last week, there is little time and much left to do. This at a moment when holiday plans distract and dismal weather wears away at us. There's an extra caveat to the motion at the end of Fall semester: while we'll receive a well-deserved break, those two weeks of winter melt away like so much snow. Fall Finals come at the end of the calendar year but the middle of the academic year. We'll be back to start again soon enough.

Maybe this explains some of the energy from Fall semester, the live wire running underneath our activity. While in the Spring we're fighting off the alluring call of Summer, in Fall we're just trying to keep this intellectual engine from stalling in the cold. We have one last muddled act of academia before we visit our families and concentrate of cheerfulness. The downward pull of the natural cycle might leave us sluggish, but it makes for a sounder landing if we can keep to our goals.

## Cycles of Library Instruction

The cycles of the instructional librarian's work cleave to the cycles of the academic calendar more closely than those of nature's yearly progress, starting just ahead of the new semester with calls to faculty to schedule and plan sessions. Instruction may begin in the first week of the semester, particularly for research courses that have students working the entire semester at a single project. Otherwise, instruction is spread fairly even from week to week as different faculty plan different assignments and call for librarian support at different times. There's a sentiment shared across many library organizations that there is no such thing as an ordinary week, and the flexibility and "just in time" instructional model that we use for our information literacy instruction means our weeks all look very different from one to the next.

This changes suddenly as the semester ends: with students underway with their projects and faculty rounding out the semester's content as they approach final presentations, the instructional sessions suddenly stop. While the students are busy working and faculty are busy grading, the instructional librarians are left with plenty of times on our hands to focus on anything that isn't preparing and offering sessions. It's a jarring change, and can leave you feeling disconnected from the regular activity of the college.

The view from the library is a distant one — while we're tasked with supporting student learning, our efforts as instructional faculty connect to students in utterly. This comes with well-documented challenges, particularly when investigated under the information literacy programs designed around "one-shot" instruction, or individual guest lecture sessions. Appearing once in a class only offers so 

## When the End is the Beginning

It's also important to consider the progress of student learning and its own cyclical patterns. Students don't arrive in our courses clear of their experiences and the accumulated knowledge — if that were the case, the whole enterprise of education would have been doomed from the first moment someone would think to teach. Instead, they're taking in the experience of your course as one in a long series of experiences in the hope that they will leave your course different than when they arrived. It's only at the end of the semester when students are capable of taking in the knowledge we've tried to share and the practices we've tried to cultivate.

The semester ends ideally with the student having proved they learned what they initially set out to learn, and the assessment is the first encounter the student will have having learned. It would be more convenient to students and to instructors if the outcomes of a course could be accumulated like so many bricks laid and set one at a time, but knowledge is rarely made of such discrete and easily moved pieces. Even in scaffolded assignments where different pieces are completed in a sequence over the duration of the semester, the achievement of the purpose of the course can only come once the whole has been taken into view.

Librarians may be familiar with the Information Search Process as a model of information seeking in the context of completing research assignments developed by Carol Kuhlthau. It's a popular model for designing instruction, supporting collaboration, and understanding the affective dimension of the student process. One of the criticisms weighed against it and other related models is its linearity: it presents the process in neatly ordered steps and a single progressive trajectory that does not adequately reflect the messy reality of research. The point is well-taken but I think misplaced. The linearity it traces is the linearity of time and its progress forward through the process of searching and completion of an assignment; what remains untraced is how students are changed by the information they find and the work they've put into it. The relief and its attendant satisfaction or disappointment can be seen at the end of every Fall, but where they've ended is the beginning of the work to come.