---
layout: post
title: Pentad for the Blog
tags: markdown pentad rhetoric
categories: introduction
---
The Pentad of Kenneth Burke from [A Grammar of Motives](https://archive.org/details/grammarofmotives1945burk) gives us the dramaticist perspective of rhetoric. From this perspective we can approach writing as something to be analyzed and engaged. This introductory post will use the features of the Pentad as a guide to the reader and to the writer alike for what this blog is, where it is made, who made it, how they made it, and why it was made.

## *Act - What is it?*

Bibliomantic is best defined as a personal research blog, a collection of time-ordered pieces of short writing on subjects that support the professional activity of its creator. At a micro-level the posts are short notes (usually more than a few hundred words and rarely more than a thousand) on encounters with scholarly writing, pieces of news, ideas in circulation, and any of the other objects one encounters in the academic line of work. At a broader level, these accumulate into a network of relations— social, intellectual, scientific —which form a record of someone's research. As the grains of individual posts gather, linked to each other by different relationships and set in reverse chronological order, a reader should get a sense of what the writer is currently working on and what they're ultimately driving at.
Subject matter is essential to guiding how this material is organized and gathered, and I can make guarantees about this up front: I'm interested in what would broadly be called "library and information science" or LIS. If it is related to the function and operation of libraries, if it's related to the creation, dissemination, and use of information, it will find a happy home in this blog. Within that broad subject there are areas that are more keenly interesting to me, some of which I engage with regularly and others which draw my curiosity, but definitionally, this is an LIS research blog.

## *Scene - Where is it?*

Blogs will on the open web, and having a fully-open environemnt for our information is makes that information more useful and more effective in sha. The specific web outlet is Github-Pages, offering free hosting for static websites with Jekyll. The he power of open research is something offered by the web that contributes to scholarship that can meet a wide range of needs and a broad (esentially universal) clientelle.
The scene is also in part defined by the library, a source of universal education. And that contributes significantly to the scene of this blog. Libraries are institutions of universal education, seeking both the widest possible number of users for the widest possible subject matter. Libraries are meant to serve the fullest possible set of information needs, but which that comes natural limits.
The scene is also related to the small academic library and the libary environments where I've worked. I've worked in public libraries,  school libraries, and academic libraries. These define the contexts of my thinking in time and place. The united states, but with and eye towards other traditions of knowledge creation.
## *Agent - Who does it?*

The "who" of the blog is just me. My name's Jon Schoenfelder, and I'm an instructional librarians at a small academic library in a small liberal arts college, and I'm writing in the context of being an early career librarian.
## *Agency - How is it done?*

## *Purpose - Why is it done?*